add new spec to snapshot page (#6188)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/snapshots.md

| id | status | updated_at | dbt_valid_from | dbt_valid_to |
| -- | ------ | ---------- | -------------- | ------------ |
| 1 | pending | 2024-01-01 | 2024-01-01 | 2024-01-02 |
| 1 | shipped | 2024-01-02 | 2024-01-02 | `null` |

## Configuring snapshots

:::info Previewing or compiling snapshots in IDE not supported

It is not possible to "preview data" or "compile sql" for snapshots in dbt Cloud. Instead, [run the `dbt snapshot` command](#how-snapshots-work) in the IDE.

:::

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.8" >

- To configure snapshots in versions 1.8 and earlier, refer to [Configure snapshots in versions 1.8 and earlier](#configure-snapshots-in-versions-18-and-earlier). These versions use an older syntax where snapshots are defined within a snapshot block in a `.sql` file, typically located in your `snapshots` directory. 

> - Note that defining multiple resources in a single file can significantly slow down parsing and compilation. For faster and more efficient management, consider the updated snapshot YAML syntax, [available in Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/versionless-cloud) or the [latest version of dbt Core](/docs/dbt-versions/core).

Author: ```suggestion
- Note that defining multiple resources in a single file can significantly slow down parsing and compilation. For faster and more efficient management, consider the updated snapshot YAML syntax, [available in Versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/versionless-cloud) or [dbt Core v1.9 and later](/docs/dbt-versions/core).
```

### Add a snapshot to your project

To add a snapshot to your project follow these steps. For users on versions 1.8 and earlier, refer to [Configure snapshots in versions 1.8 and earlier](#configure-snapshots-in-versions-18-and-earlier). 

1. Create a YAML file in your `snapshots` directory: `snapshots/orders_snapshot.yml` and add your configuration details. You can also configure your snapshot from your `dbt_project.yml` file ([docs](/reference/snapshot-configs)).

    <File name='snapshots/orders_snapshot.yml'>

    ```yaml
    snapshots:
      - name: orders_snapshot
        relation: source('jaffle_shop', 'orders')
        config:
          schema: snapshots
          database: analytics
          unique_key: id
          strategy: timestamp
          updated_at: updated_at

    ```
    </File>

2. Since snapshots focus on configuration, the transformation logic is minimal. Typically, you'd select all data from the source. If you need to apply transformations (like filters, deduplication), it's best practice to define an ephemeral model and reference it in your snapshot configuration.

    ```yaml
    -- models/ephemeral_orders.sql

>     {{ config(materialized='ephemeral') }}

Reviewer: For consistency with the other examples, I'd suggest using `<File ...>...</File>` for the file named `models/ephemeral_orders.sql` and then remove the comment containing the file name.
`

</Expandable>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.8">

<Expandable alt_header="Use a target_schema that is separate to your analytics schema">

Snapshots cannot be rebuilt. As such, it's a good idea to put snapshots in a separate schema so end users know they are special. From there, you may want to set different privileges on your snapshots compared to your models, and even run them as a different user (or role, depending on your warehouse) to make it very difficult to drop a snapshot unless you really want to.

</Expandable>
</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.9">

<Expandable alt_header="Use a schema that is separate to your models' schema">

Snapshots can't be rebuilt. Because of this, it's a good idea to put snapshots in a separate schema so end users know they're special. From there, you may want to set different privileges on your snapshots compared to your models, and even run them as a different user (or role, depending on your warehouse) to make it very difficult to drop a snapshot unless you really want to.

</Expandable>

<Expandable alt_header="Use ephemeral model to clean or tranform data before snapshotting">

>  If you need to clean or transform your data before snapshotting, create an ephemeral model (or a staging model) that applies the necessary transformations. Then, reference this model in your snapshot configuration. This approach keeps your snapshot definitions clean and allows you to test and run transformations separately.

Reviewer: 🤩
